Title: The ADD Developer
Category: Development
Date: 2016-09-12

I was diagnosed with Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) when I was in my late
20s. In the course of using this diagnosis to better understand myself and to
help foster continuing self-improvement, I've run into all kinds of
proconceptions about the disorder - chief among them that it doesn't exist at
all, or that it's merely a lack of discipline.

# ADD is real.

I have absolutely zero doubt that ADD is real thing. Where I do have my doubts
is whether or not it's a "disorder". To me, this is just how my mind has
always worked. One misconception I think many people hold is that ADD is
merely the inability to focus. They see (and hear about) kids who have been
diagnosed with it who spend hours on end in front of a television or computer
screen, and fail to understand how someone who can be so engrossed in an
activity they seem to enjoy but be unable to spend even a few minutes studying
or working without struggling. They see this as a lack of discipline, and in
some way they are right - ADD is primarily about the inability to choose one's
focus, not the inability to focus, period.

One of the blessing in my life for which I'm very grateful is that learning is
something that I've always enjoyed. I can imagine how school would be tortuous
for someone with ADD, being required to focus on a single task for hours but
being completely unable to. That wasn't the case for me; my distractions in
the classroom was usually a book that I'd brought with me, and as long as I
glanced up at the chalkboard every so often to see what was being discussed I
was able to keep up. I rarely encountered new material in class, and when I
did, I caught on quickly and usually found myself drawn in to reading ahead in
the textbook.

# Medication is a Godsend

I really woke up to what ADD is when I had (of all things) an abcessed tooth.
After the root canal I was prescribed hydrocodone, and while on it I sat down
and found that I was extremely productive. My mind was clear for the first
time I ever recall. I went to my doctor soon afterward and told him about my
experience, describing it as if I had walked out of a busy restaurant at
dinner into a quiet, snow-covered night. The constant stream of conversation
in my head that was just outside the threshold of constant thought was
quieted. I told him that it seemed obvious to me that an opioid habit wasn't a
reasonable price to pay for that, but if it was possible with them then it
seemed like a good idea to ask if there was something less potentially harmful
that would act similarly. This lead to my diagnosis, and I was ultimately
prescribed Vyvanse. Vyvanse metabolises into Adderall, which is nothing more
than an amphetamine salt.

On Vyvanse I might say that I feel like a different person, but that's not
precisely true. I feel like myself, only *more fully*. I'm more personable,
less prone to frustration, and most important of all, am largely able to make
myself focus on a topic of my choosing. That's HUGE for me as a developer.
Before, my work was very periodic and unpredictable. I would commonly spend a
few days or more basically staring at the screen trying to get a handle on a
fairly simple problem, until I was able to get myself to achieve "flow state",
at which point I'd stay there as long as possible and knock out days or weeks
worth of work in a single sitting. Any interruption during my flow state would
be a major setback. After taking Vyvanse, I can enter flow state with a few
minute's effort. That meant that someone coming by my desk to ask a question
isn't anywhere near the setback it was before, and that I am far more
productive. More importantly, I am more consistently productive

It is without question that I am a more valuable employee when taking Vyvanse.
It concerns me somewhat that I'm basically taking a drug to enhance my
performance, and that's something about which I've given a great deal of
thought. In the end, it is a tradeoff that I'm willing to make. I'm an adult
makign an informed decision. If anything, I believe that such drugs should be
more broadly available even to those without ADD and similar disorders.

Another thing that has surprised me is that a *large* number of IT
professionals regularly take amphetamines, prescribed or illicit. Since
"coming out" about my use of Vyvanse, over half of the programmers I know have
told me that they take Ritalin, Adderall, or Vyvanse. Almost all of them use
caffeine for the same purpose, which when you think about it really isn't all
that much different.

# Medicating Children

I see these tendencies in my oldest daughter as well. Yesterday I told her to
clean her room, which she began to do earnestly and without argument. That
lasted all of sixty seconds or so, before I saw that she was watching a
cooking show on the television in the living room. I reminded her again to
clean her room, and off she went... for another couple of minutes, when the
sounds of activity from her room ceased. I poked my head in and found her
reading a book about horses.  "Clean you room Lynzy." Back to work. I remember
interactions with my parents just like this with great clarity. I don't recall
them ever getting angry with me for it, but they were certainly frustrated. I
know that I never meant to get distracted, but it happened nonetheless.
Likewise I do my best to not be angry with my own children for doing the same
thing. They truly can't help it.

So far Lynzy seems to be much like me in this regard. She respects her parents
and wants to please us, but often falls short when tasked with a multi-step
process. We correct her as patiently and as gently as we can, and try to help
her develop the mental discipline necessary to do well in life.

Neither of my children have been diagnosed with ADD, and I don't intend to
have them speak to a doctor about it for a few years at least. Instead, I want
them to be aware of their own personalities and character traits as God
created them. If inability to hold focus becomes an issue that bothers them or
holds them back in the future, then by all means I will fully support them
seeking help. For the time being, I would prefer that they be able to follow
their passions and interests and simply experience the joy of being a child
and learning about the world.

Lynzy has been spending a lot of time playing *Star Stable* recently. My first
instinct as a parent was to restrict her playing time, especially in light of
my own addiction to EverQuest in a dark time in my life. Instead, I gave it a
couple of weeks and observed. The biggest thing I noticed was a substantial
improvement in her reading ability; she went from halting every couple of
words to reading most sentences without stopping and understanding the text.
I attribute this to her questing in the game. She likes to play *Star Stable*,
and in order to progress she had to complete quests. In order to complete
quests, she had to understand the requirements. In order the understand the
requirements, she had to read them. In light of this, instead of imposing
strict limits on her play time I bought her a premium membership.

As for medication... well, when Lynzy wanted her ears pierced I had a single,
simple requirement: that she convince me that she understood the consequences
of the decision. It was going to hurt when they did it, be sore for a while
afterward, and it would be her responsibility to care for them so they didn't
become infected. Every time she said she wanted to get it done, I asked her to
tell me about what would happen. For a long time, her response was that it was
going to hurt when they did it, and then she'd be able to wear real earrings.
After a while, she was able to tell me about how it would hurt a little
afterwards, what infection was, and how she was going to have to take care of
her ears to keep that from happening. Once she did that, I took her to the
mall and let her get them pierced. I think she was four at the time. She
winced when the first one was done, and I saw a single tear welling up in her
eye. She took a moment to compose herself, smiled at me, and turned her other
ear to face the girl doing the piercing.

I see medication a lot like that. There are positives and negatives, and if my
girls are mature enough to understand them and want to try it, then I fully
support that decision - but it is not something that I'm going to pressure
them to do.

