:Title: PyCon Drama
:Date: 2013-03-27
:Category: Politics

Weekend before last, I attended PyCon. It was a blast - I met a ton of
interesting new people, caught up with friends I've not seen in months, and got
involved in a variety of new projects I don't have time for. In other words - I
was lucky enough to be able to immerse myself in the incredibly passionate and
capable Python community.

This sort of thing is exactly why I've spent the last year or so restructuring
my life to be more involved with the Python community. Every time I go to a
conference or meetup, I come away more energized and excited than I arrived.
This is the only place I've ever felt that to this degree, in my entire life.
That's something very special to me.

A Wild Drama Llama Appears
--------------------------

... and then I got home, and read about *Donglegate*. Joy.

If you've somehow missed all this, I'll give a quick overview and spare you the
gory details. Apparently two guys at the conference shared a couple of jokes
based on sexual inuendo, in the middle of a conference room, during a speaker's
session. A female attendee overheard and was offended, and took their photo,
and posted it on Twitter and tagged PyCon. PyCon staff handled the report well,
and then the Internet arrived in the conversation. First the person who made
the joke was fired from his job, then the person who reported it was fired from
her job. There was much wailing and gnashing of teeth.

There has been a positive result, however! The PyCon Code of Conduct is now on
`Github <https://github.com/python/pycon-code-of-conduct>`_, and there has been
some changes designed to prevent the damage to our public image for future
incidents. Far better than that, the changes have sparked a dialogue on Github
as to how these sorts of things should be handled - the result of which will be
a revised set of guidelines with great community input (and hence, ownership).

Introspection
-------------

All of the discussion of feminism, women in the Python community, and how this
specific situation has caused me to examine how I feel about the issue in far
greater depth that I otherwise would have.

First, as you undoubtably know if you know me personally, I'm an extreme
libertarian - an `Anarcho-Capitalist`_. I abhor the initiation of violence, and
view politics through that lens. I'm predisposed towards solutions where mutual
benefit is the result and minimal coercion is required. With that in mind, the
popular concepts of affirmative action, hiring quotas, and anti-discrimination
legislation are things that I resent and against which I am strongly opposed.

Leading up to PyCon, I read several articles where the author was decrying the
lack of gender diversity in our community, and stating that women aren't
universally comfortable within it. While I certainly see diversity as a
strength within a community, I'm not particularly concerned with attempting to
proactively influence others' behavior in an attempt to make a third party more
comfortable. To be blunt, I simply don't see it as my problem.

What gave (and still gives) me pause is that *this seems to be effective*.
Organizations like PyLadies_ and LadyCoders_ have increased the proportion of
female Python developers are community functions, and at PyCon in particular -
and while I wouldn't hold up a specific proportion as a goal, it is readily
apparent that bringing different perspective and thought patterns into Python
is a good thing.

So... do I think we are hostile to outsiders? Sometimes, sure. This is a tribe
we've built, and there's a level of camaraderie that comes with what we do.
That's intimidating to some, and it turns out that it's particularly
intimidating to many women. I suspect that's because of the traditional gender
roles held by (and via social pressure, enforced by) our society. Broadly
speaking, passive and nurturing behaviors are seen as feminine while aggressive
and self-aggrandized ones are seen as masculine. The latter is better suited to
the meritocratic culture of Open Source. This became clear to me after reading:

    What I mean is this: no more unwritten rules or expectations. No more
    assumptions that we're living in a `utopian meritocracy`_. We don't. Sure,
    OSS has been defined as "they with the best code and who does the work,
    wins" - but that ignores the frequent corollary of "those with the thickest
    hide, and ability to fight win".

    -- Jesse Noller, `The Code of Conduct`_, 07 Dec 2012

The thing that's striking about that is how well this fits my own personality.
When I attended PyOhio 2012, I realized that this was where I wanted to be in
my professional life. I spoke with my wife, and then I *acted*. I helped
organize `PyArkansas`_, I began driving an hour and a half each way to attend
`pySGF`_ each month, I started contributing to `Gittip`_, and so on. I asserted
myself, because that's what I do.

Not everyone is like me, though. I'm empathetic to this and go out of my way to
not run over the top of people who aren't able or willing to assert themselves
and get their point across. Recognizing when this is about to happen is a skill
that I've consciously developed.

Maybe - just maybe - the current unorganized diversity movement within the
Python community is our collective way of developing that same skill, but on a
community level.

I really think that's the case. As such, I will continue to do my best to bite
my tongue as much as possible when confronted with what I perceive to be the
beginnings of a touchy-feely, "politically correct" cultural shift. Instead, I
will reach out to the people behind organizations and try to influence the
development of a more accepting but still individualist, meritocratic Python
community.

Foot, Meet Mouth
----------------

In closing, I'd like to share my own mis-step in the social minefield that are
gender relations today. While sprinting with `Gittip`_ upstairs at the Hyatt, I
was speaking with a female developer that was working with us. Regretably, I
don't immediately recall her name or what she was working on, but we got off on
a sidebar about how to implement something or other, when she said her coworker
had implemented something similar in the past.

I asked her - and this part I remember with crystal clarity - "How did he do
it?" Without skipping a bit, she replied "*She* _____".

Oh, crap.

She had stressed the word "she" just enough so that I knew that I had made an
unwarranted assumption, and she noticed. Nothing else was said about this and
the conversation continud on, but let me tell you - I felt terrible.

I certainly hadn't meant to offend anyone, and honestly if challenged directly
wouldn't have made the assumption that her coworker was male. In my mind at the
time, "he" was simply a generic pronoun. I had no mental image of her coworker,
and honestly it's irrelevant what he or she looked like. Their sex was no more
a concern for me than the color of their hair - I was only interested in how a
problem had been solved. This is how it should be, and how I assume everyone
sees the world unless that assumption is challenged.

It knocked me out of my hacking groove for a moment though, as I realized that
this *was* an issue for her. Not necessarily a grave insult, but she wasn't
thrilled that I had implied an assumption that her coworker was male. It didn't
matter to her at that moment my intellectual ramblings on equality versus
egalitarianism versus coerced affirmative action - *I had been inconsiderate.*

Thankfully, my hacking partner handled the situation with grace. I was shown
that I was alienating her, and corrected my mistake for the future. Still, this
is why the drama surrounding PyCon has impacted me as deeply as it has and
taken so much of my mental energy over the past week or so - because I was
inadvertently guilty of the same crime that had ended up crucifying two people
and potentially ended their careers.

.. _Anarcho-Capitalist: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarcho-capitalism
.. _PyLadies: http://www.pyladies.com/
.. _LadyCoders: http://ladycoders.com/
.. _The Code of Conduct: http://jessenoller.com/blog/2012/12/7/the-code-of-conduct
.. _utopian meritocracy: http://geekfeminism.org/2010/10/09/meritocracy-might-want-to-re-think-how-you-define-merit/
.. _PyArkansas: http://www.pyarkansas.org/
.. _pySGF: https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!forum/pysgf
.. _Gittip: http://www.gittip.com/